*abc-vim.txt*    For Vim version 7.3.  Last change: 2012 Jun 14

                  -------------------------------
                  abc Music Notation, version 2.1
                  -------------------------------

Author:  Lee Savide <laughingman182@gmail.com>, or <laughingman182@yahoo.com>
Copyright: (c) 2012 by Lee Savide                *abc-vim-copyright*
    |pi_abc.txt| by Lee Savide is licensed under a Creative Commons
    Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported License. Please
    read the license deed at
    http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/.

==============================================================================
CONTENTS                                                    *abc-vim-contents*

    1. Introduction                  |abc-vim|
    2. Prerequisites                 |abc-vim-prerequisites|
    3. Why abc-vim?                  |abc-vim-why|
    4. abc Intro                     |abc-vim-intro|
        4.1.                            
        4.2. 
        4.3. 
    5. abc syntax                    |abc-vim-syntax|
        5.1.                         |abc-vim-syntax-|
        5.2.                         |abc-vim-syntax-|
        5.3.                         |abc-vim-syntax-|
        5.4.                         |abc-vim-syntax-|
        5.5.                         |abc-vim-syntax-|
        5.6.                         |abc-vim-syntax-|
        5.7.                         |abc-vim-syntax-|
        5.8.                         |abc-vim-syntax-|
        5.9.                         |abc-vim-syntax-|
        5.10.                        |abc-vim-syntax-|
        5.11.                        |abc-vim-syntax-|
        5.12.                        |abc-vim-syntax-|
        5.13.                        |abc-vim-syntax-|
        5.14.                        |abc-vim-syntax-|
    6. Folding                       |abc-vim-folding|
    7. Placeholders                  |abc-vim-placeholders|
    8. Compilers                     |abc-vim-compilers|
    9. Omnicompletion                |abc-vim-omni|
    10.                              |abc-vim-|
    11. Options                      |abc-vim-options|
       11.1. Registered Tunes        |abc-vim-register-files|
       11.2. Temporary Tunes         |abc-vim-temporary-files|
       11.3. Per-Tune Options        |abc-vim-local-options|
       11.4. Global Options          |abc-vim-global-options|
    12. Help                         |abc-vim-help|
    13. Developers                   |abc-vim-developers|
    14. Changelog                    |abc-vim-changelog|
    15. Licenses                     |abc-vim-licenses|
    16. Todo                         |abc-vim-todo|

==============================================================================
1. Introduction                                                      *abc-vim*

abc-vim is an update for the syntax highlighting for the abc music notation
language that comes standard in Vim, and also provides features for the abc
music notation languages by making full use of all the things that make Vim
such a wonderful text editor.

For the moment, the only part of the scripts that will be worked on is the
syntax script, since that lets all the other scripts that will be worked on in
the future something to work from.

==============================================================================
2. Prerequisites                                       *abc-vim-prerequisites*

Make sure you have these settings in your vimrc file: >
    'set nocompatible'
    'filetype plugin on'
    'syntax on'
    'set omnifunc=syntaxcomplete#Complete'

Without them abc-vim will not work properly.

Additionally, I would suggest that you first be able to understand common
concepts in music theory. For any one who may be new to writing music,
I suggest using this guide as a means to get familiar with the abc standard,
while also learning how music notation works in general: >

    http://abcplus.sourceforge.net/#ABCGuide

If it interests you, you can also learn to make a tin whistle from PVC pipe: >

    http://www.ggwhistles.com/howto/

Both the guide and the how-to on making tin whistles are written by the same
author, Dr. Guido Gonzato, from Verona, Italy. Both guides are written very well,
especially for someone who has addmitted to me in an email that English was
not his first language. Both guides are free to download at your leasure. The
ABC PLus guide is under a GNU GPL license(technically, I think that makes it
FDL, though, but oh well), and the how-to guide is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 3.0 Unported license. Please read
the Creative Commons deed for the how-to guide at: >
 
    http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/

And also read the terms and conditions of the GNU GPL at: >

    http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.txt

Or in HTML at: >

    http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0-standalone.html

==============================================================================
3. Why abc-vim?                                                  *abc-vim-why*

You're probably wondering why you should use abc to notate music. Why use
something new that you've probably never heard of, if you're so used to using
some other tool, like Finale or Sibelius? Why switch?

Of all the reasons I could list, the biggest reasons are learning curve & SPEED.

In both Finale & Sibelius, and in other music notation software, including
non-commercial and open source applications, like MuseScore, and even in
software that's not as well known, like NoteWorthy Composer, the design of
the software feels as if it's going out of it's way to make writing music
even more difficult than it is if you were to write it by hand. They don't
even give you any sort of means to do certain things, like transposition in
some cases, without having to start all over from the beginning. And even when
writing music by hand, there are situations where the objective you're trying
to accomplish in the music requires you to rewrite the whole song!

Then a wise man named Chris Walshaw improvised a means for a standard of
music notation that software would be able to conform around, as opposed to
conforming the music notation around the software. He named it abc music
notation.

Even in it's initial version, it was clear that abc had a very clear and
definitive standing as a music notation format. But not because it's
implementing software was better than the others (although that is debatable),
but because it was designed entirely around the fundamentals of music theory
as a whole. The format TAUGHT it's users how music works in an entirely
hands-on way that made abc popular.

Even so, abc was still "just another music notation format". What made it
stand out? And yet during the same time that it was made, it had also taken
it's root as the lingua franca for traditional Irish folk tunes, and had
incorporated support for certain forms of music, most specifically, for that
of Highland bagpipe music. This, along with it's low learning curve, provided
the foundation of a format that has contributed to hundreds of thousands of
thousands of written songs, all as abc music.

With that said, I began these scripts for a number of reasons:
    1. Because I love music, and I live in music, and will die with music.
    2. Because abc.vim is heavily outdated. The syntax groups currently used
    cause improper matching with the newer format.
    3. Because there ought to be a default editor for abc, particularily one
    that can be extended easily, and in a multitude of ways.
    4. Out of disrespect & contempt of Finale and Sibelius; Mostly of Finale.
    Sibelius slightly redeemed itself to me by providing examples and ear
    training examples within the program, but in Finale they literally leave
    you stranded, like Micro$oft...WHICH IS A VERY ACCURATE COMPARISON, IF I
    MUST SAY. >:T

Now that I've gotten that off my chest, I can talk about the scripts. :3

==============================================================================
4. ABC Intro                                                   *abc-vim-intro*

Author: John Chambers <jc@trillian.mit.edu>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
               An Introduction to ABC Music Notation                        ~
                        by John Chambers                                    ~
                       <jc@trillian.mit.edu>                                ~
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Here's a simple example of ABC notation for a well-known Irish jig: >

X: 1
T: The Kesh Jig
T: The Kincora Jig
R: jig
M: 6/8
L: 1/8
K: G
D \
| "G"~G3       GAB | "D7"~A3     ABd | "G"edd gdd | "D7"edB   dBA \
| "G"~G3 "(Em)"GAB | "Am"~A3 "D7"ABd | "G"edd gdB | "D7"AGF "G"G2 :|
|: A \
| "G"~B3 dBd | "C"ege "G"dBG | "G"~B3 dBG | "Am"~A3 "D7"AGA \
| "G"~B3 dBd | "C"ege "G"dBd | "C"~g3 aga | "D7"bgf  "G"g2 :|
<

This is fairly easy to read, and once you understand it, you can quickly
start typing in your own tunes.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.1 Headers                                        *abc-vim-abc-intro-headers*

First, there are a bunch of "header" lines that say things about the tune as
a whole. The X: line merely gives an index number. If a file has several
tunes, they should all be given different X numbers. Some ABC software lets
you use the X: number to extract tunes from collections, sort of like the way
that some CD players let you pick the order of play.

The T:  lines give titles. This tune has two titles. I put "The Kesh Jig"
first because, in my experience, that's the one that is the best known.
Printing software will typically show the first title in a larger font than
others, which are considered "subtitles".

The R: line ("rhythm") says it's a jig. This is also used by some software.
For example, f you're on a Unix-like system you could use a command like: >
   grep -li "R: *jig" *.abc
<
to locate all the jigs in a directory of abc files.

The M: line gives the meter, 6/8 in this case. You can use M:C and M:C| for
the obvious "common" (4/4) and "cut" (2/2) times. You can also say M:none for
no time signature at all.

The L: line gives the basic or default length of a note. In this case, L:1/8
says that a note without any time modifier is an eighths note (semiquaver).
This is only used in converting ABC to printed music.

The K: line gives the key. In this case, the key is G major. "K: Gm" would
mean G minor. The abc standard also includes the classical modes, so that "K:
Gdor" means G dorian (one flat), and "K:  Amix" means A Mixolydian (two
sharps). The mode can be spelled out or abbreviated to three characters, and
minor can be abbreviated to just m.

ABC's rules say that the X: and T: lines must be first, and the K: line is
the last of the header lines. Then comes the fun part, the music.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.2 Music                                               *abc-vim-intro-music*

First, if you play a melody instrument, you can ignore all the stuff in
double quotes. Those are called "accompaniment chords". They are to be played
on guitar or accordion or harp or whatever. Now that you know what they are,
you can probably understand the chords in this tune. So we can ignore them,
and the first part of the tune is:

   D \
   | ~G3 GAB | ~A3 ABd | edd gdd | edB dBA \

The backslash means "continued on next line", and is used to merge several
lines of abc into one staff. When reading, we can ignore backslashes, and the
result is:
   D | ~G3 GAB | ~A3 ABd | edd gdd | edB dBA

The letters A-G and a-g are notes. Large notes are the bottom half of the
staff, and lower case is the upper half. The scale actually runs CDEFGAB,
with C being the C below the staff, and B being the line in the middle of the
treble staff. Similarly, cdefgab is the scale from the c in the middle of the
staff to the b above the staff. Programmers hate this, but musicians will see
why it's a good idea.

A number after a note is a note length. So G3 means a G three times as long
as the L: value. In this case, it's a G of length 3/8, or a dotted quarter
note.  You can also use fractions if you wish. So G3/2 would mean a G of
length 3/16, or a dotted eighth note. You can omit a numerator of 1 or a
denominator of 2, so G1/2, G/2 and G/ all mean the same thing, a G of length
1/16 in this tune.

The only thing left to understand the above line is knowing that ~ is
notation for a "turn". It is displayed as a large ~ symbol above or below the
note, and played however you feel like playing it.

So, to translate this all into rather coarse ASCII graphics, here are the
first two bars of the above line:

                                                                 ,|
                                           ,|                  ,/ |
         |\                 ~            ,/ |     ~          ,/   |
     ----|/--#----------|--------------,/---|-|------------,/-|---|-|
         /              |            ,/ |   | |   |       |   |   | |
     ---/|-----6--------|---|-------|---|---|-|---|-------|---|-(*)-|
       / |              |   |       |   |   | |   |       |   |     |
     -/--|----------|\--|---|-------|---|-(*)-|---|-------|-(*)-----|
     (  /| \        | | |   | .     | (*)     | (*) .   (*)         |
     -\--|-/---8----|-|-|-(*)-----(*)---------|---------------------|
       \ |/         | ' |                     |                     |
     ----|----------|---|---------------------|---------------------|
         J        (*)

Wow, that was difficult to type! The ABC notation is much easier, especially
if you're a keyboard player. But anyone who plays any instrument should find
ABC fairly easy to type.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Let's see, what else do you need to know? Oh, yes; in the above tune, you'll
see |: and :| symbols. You guessed right; these are repeat symbols. I left
out the |: at the beginning, as is done in a lot of printed music. You can
also indicate first and second endings:
    |: ...  |1 ...  :|2 ...  ||
where ... represents any music. The || symbol represents a double bar, and
you can use [| and |] to get the thick+thin or thin+thick styles of double
bars. You can also use :: in the middle of a line as a shorthand for :||:,
that is, double bars with repeats on both sides.

There's also notation for two more octaves. It is sort of pictorial, using a
comma (,) for "one octave down" and an apostrophe (') for "one octave up. So
G,A,B, are the three lowest notes on a fiddle or mandolin, and c' is the
second leger line above the treble staff.

It's also useful to be able to include rests. The ABC symbol for a rest is
the letter 'z' (and note that it's lower case). It is used just like a note,
and takes lengths in the same manner.

Something not covered in the above example is accidentals. There is an
obvious problem with the ASCII character set: It has a sharp sign, but no
natural or flat sign. The solution is simple: _G is a G flat; =G is a G
natural, and ^G is a G sharp. Note that this is a bit inconsistent with the
notation for keys and chords: K:Gb and K:G# are how you indicate keys of G
flat and G sharp; "Gbm" and "G#7" are G flat minor and G sharp seventh
chords. But since 'b' is used for a note, it can't be used with notes to
indicate a flat. So the pictorial _=^ symbols are used.

You can also indicate ties and slurs. A tie (or single-note slur) can be
indicated with a hyphen. If the above tune had started G3- GAB it would have
meant to tie the G to the G in the second group of notes. To get a slur, put
parentheses around a group of notes. Thus, in the above example, you might
indicate a generic jig bowing by writing:
   D | ~G2G (GA)B | ~A2A (AB)d | (ed)d (gd)d | (ed)B (dB)A |

A few words about spacing: I've used more spaces in the above examples than
you really need. About the only spaces that are needed within the music are
the ones that separate groups of notes. This is used by abc display or print
programs to determine how notes are beamed together. If the third bar had
been |eddgdd|, the result would be six notes all beamed together. If you
write |ed dg dd| you would get a waltz-type beaming, with three groups of two
notes each. |edd gdd| gives two groups of three notes each.

Spaces around the bar lines aren't needed, but they help a lot if you want
your ABC to be readable by humans. Also, the header lines don't need spaces
after the colons, but they add slightly to readability.

There are some other useful header lines. C: is used to indicate the
Composer. O: is used to comment on the Origin. S: is used to give a Source.
B: is used to list Books where the music can be found. D: means discography
(recordings). H: is used for Historical notes. N: is used for random other
notes. And you should put your name and email address on a Z: line, which is
used to indicate who did the transcription. (T: was already taken.) You can
see O:Trad in a lot of old tunes. And Q:120 or Q:1/4=110 may be used to
indicate a metronome setting.

There's more to ABC, but this is all you need to know to read or write
typical folk tunes. Now go to your favorite editor and type in a few tunes.
And check out the ABC home page: >
   http://abcnotation.org.uk/
You'll find pointers to lots of software and music collections there.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

This is the second file from my set of ABC documents. Some others: >
  http://trillian.mit.edu/~jc/music/abc/doc/ABCtrivial.txt
  http://trillian.mit.edu/~jc/music/abc/doc/ABCintro.txt    (this file)
  http://trillian.mit.edu/~jc/music/abc/doc/ABCprimer.html
  http://trillian.mit.edu/~jc/music/abc/doc/ABCtut.html
<
==============================================================================
5.                                                            *abc-vim-syntax*

==============================================================================
6.                                                           *abc-vim-folding*

==============================================================================
7.                                                      *abc-vim-placeholders*

==============================================================================
8.                                                         *abc-vim-compilers*

==============================================================================
9.                                                              *abc-vim-omni*

==============================================================================
10.                                                          *abc-vim-options*

==============================================================================
11.                                                             *abc-vim-help*

==============================================================================
12.                                                       *abc-vim-developers*

==============================================================================
13.                                                        *abc-vim-changelog*

==============================================================================
15.                                                         *abc-vim-licenses*

==============================================================================
16. Todo                                                        *abc-vim-todo*


 vim:tw=78:ts=8:ft=help
